[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: Hello.
My name's Gregg
Braden, and I'd like
to be the first to
welcome you to this very
special presentation of "Missing
Links: Simulation by Design:
Are We Living in a
Virtual Reality?"
I am your host for
this entire series,
and I'm absolutely thrilled
to personally bring
each and every episode of this
all new "Missing Links" program
directly to you.
And I want you to know
why I'm so excited.
There's a growing body
of scientific evidence
that now suggests
that we are living
our lives inside of a digital
simulation, a massive computer
program the size of the universe
that began running long, long
ago, sometime in
our ancient past,
creating the virtual reality
we see as our everyday world
right now.
Well, the implications of such
a discovery, they're huge,
they're vast, they're
deep, and they
tear right into the core of
our most intimate beliefs
about everything from
healing and disease
to war and peace, life, death,
religion, god, angels, ETs,
aliens, UFOs, the
cosmos, and even beyond.
Now I know that the possibility
itself may sound like something
from a science fiction movie.
And I know that because
it did to me as well.
That is, until I began to
consider the new evidence.
And that's what this
series is all about.
In this program we'll
explore the discoveries,
where they lead, what
they mean in our lives,
what they're telling us today.
So let's begin at the beginning
with what scientists are now
calling the forbidden question.
Is it possible that each moment
of every day of our lives
is actually happening inside of
a simulated reality that looks
and feels totally real to us?
First, I'd like to be
absolutely clear about precisely
what a simulation is, what
I'm talking about when
I refer to a simulation.
A simulation is
an experience that
allows us to immerse ourselves
in an unfamiliar environment,
first.
And second, it allows us
to master the parameters
of that environment in
a relatively safe way
while minimizing
the risk of injury
to ourselves or to one another.
So the idea of a
digital environment
is certainly nothing
new for us today.
We already use
simulated environments
in a number of places.
For example, what you're
seeing on your screen
right now is a
musical awards show.
It was actually hosted
in Orlando, Florida,
and the woman that you're
seeing standing on the left
is the host, is the
emcee of the program.
And she's presenting an award to
two musicians who could not be
present at the actual ceremony.
Because of schedules, they are
performing in London, England.
Now the audience
didn't know that.
So you're seeing a holographic
projection, a virtual reality
of those two performers as
if they are live on stage
with the emcee.
And as you see on
your screen, it's
very difficult to tell that
they are not actually there.
The audience didn't know that
these people were not really
there.
And it was from
this digital reality
that the two were
able to interact
the performers and
emcee so that they
can receive their award without
leaving their home in England.
And the audience
had the opportunity
to see the whole thing.
So this is an example of how we
are using digital environments
already, simulations, in
the entertainment world.
And there's another example,
that was even more recent,
and this was at the 2014
Billboard Music Awards.
This one, however,
was very controversial
because it was a video of
Michael Jackson performing
a song that had
never been released.
The problem was Michael
Jackson died in 2009.
And the simulation that
you're going to see
is so real that people in
the audience, some of them,
were actually offended
at the reality
of having a deceased man perform
in front of them on the screen.
And the point of me sharing
this with you is the audience
could not tell that this
was a digital reality,
it looked so real.
So here it is.
You can check it
out for yourself.
[BEGIN VIDEO PLAYBACK - MICHAEL
JACKSON, "SLAVE TO THE RHYTHM"]
[END PLAYBACK]
So what you've just seen
is a beautiful example
of how far this digital
technology and the ability
to create simulations have come
in a very short period of time.
We've only had computers
for about 60 to 70 years.
People in the audience could
not tell that that was not
the real Michael Jackson.
He interacted with
the other dancers,
he interacted with the audience,
and he looked very real to us.
So the point here is
that we're already
using these simulations
in a number of ways
in our everyday world around us.
The new theories that
we're talking about
are asking the question,
are we living within one
of those simulations?
Now there are different
kinds of simulations,
and I've shared a couple
of examples of how they
can be used in entertainment.
Many of us are familiar
with the visors, the helmets
that we can use for a
personal simulation,
a personal virtual reality.
And in this case, we place
the visor over our head.
We have the
experience personally,
but the people around us are
not having the same experience.
So as you can see
on the screen, there
is an example of one man on the
right-hand side of the screen,
he's having his
personal reality.
But it we're looking
at him on the outside,
we can't see what he's seeing.
On the left-hand
side, you can see
what it is that he's actually
seeing and interacting with.
So this is a kind of a
personal virtual reality.
But we also use personal
realities and simulations
collectively.
We use them in places like
planetariums and Sea World
where we want to portray
an environment, maybe
in an ancient
environment of dinosaurs
or an underwater
environment, something
that we will never
experience personally,
in our everyday lives.
So we also use
simulations very commonly
to train for complex tasks,
sometimes dangerous tasks,
landing on the moon,
for example, or on Mars,
emergency response scenarios,
and first responder and wartime
scenarios.
We often use
simulations so that we
can train in a relatively
safe environment
so that we are
prepared when we need
to find ourselves in those
dangerous environments.
Airline cockpit simulators, what
you're seeing on your screen
right now, the
last thing you want
is for your pilot to be landing
his plane, a Boeing 747,
in a high crosswind on a rainy,
stormy day the very first time
when you're in the plane.
You'd like to know that
he's had this experience
and that he is trained
to do so in the past.
So this is the
value of simulations
as they are used today.
So with this in mind,
I want to go back
to the original question that
I asked only a few moments ago.
Are we in one of those
simulations right now,
in a massive simulation
the size of a universe?
And if we were--
let me ask you this--
would you know it?
Would you know the
difference between what
is called a base reality,
or a fundamental reality,
and a simulated or
a digital reality?
Is everything that we're seeing
happening in our everyday lives
a part of this simulation?
Well, the idea itself is
actually a new language
for something that we
have heard about and been
conditioned to think about
for a very, very long time.
To illustrate this, what I'd
like to do is share with you
the characteristics of a
simulation as we know it today.
And then let's go into one of
our most ancient and cherished
spiritual traditions, into the
mystical texts of our past.
And let's see what
they are describing
and how that description
parallels with the simulation
that we're seeing today.
I think you're going to find
this really interesting.
The characteristics
of a simulated world.
A simulation has a
place where it begins,
a definite beginning, and it
has a place where it ends.
And what happens in between
that beginning and the ending
is based on a mathematic
algorithm, a rhythm of cycles
in patterns that repeat
again and again and again
on different scales.
In a simulation, there are rules
that govern the simulation.
And the idea is that as the
people in the simulation
become more familiar
with the environment,
as they learn those
rules, life gets better.
They improve with practice.
In a simulation, users have
access to another reality that
is not within the simulation.
In a simulation,
the users always
have access to an
external reality
that they can tap
into for guidance
if they get into trouble or
if they need clarification.
They always have the
ability to communicate
beyond the simulation itself.
That's going to be
really important in just
a few minutes.
And in a simulation,
as I've just mentioned,
the user cannot tell the
simulation from the real world.
So these are the characteristics
of a modern simulation
as we know it today, as we
use them today typically.
Now with this in
mind, let's go back
and look at what our most
ancient and cherished
spiritual traditions from a
number of different religions
tell us about the
world that we live in.
They tell us almost
universally that our world has
a beginning-- and there are
different ideas about what that
beginning is, but there is
a clear beginning in every
religious tradition--
and that our world will have
an end, that it does not
continue forever.
That is almost a universal
truth throughout the religions.
And that the events
that are unfolding
between the beginning
and that end
are based on natural
rhythms and cycles.
Our most cherished
spiritual traditions tell us
that every life has a
beginning and every life
must have an end.
They are not perpetual.
They tell us that there are
rules to living in this world,
and that our lives will get
better as we learn those rules.
Now, there are different
interpretations
of those rules in
different traditions.
Some of them are as
common as the golden rule,
do unto others as you'd
have them do unto you.
Some of them are reflected
in the 10 Commandments
that tell us about how
to conduct our lives.
And then other
spiritual traditions,
in the shamanic traditions
and in the Egyptian mystical
traditions, they
all give us insights
into how we live our
lives in this world.
Here's the key.
Every ancient
spiritual tradition
tells us that beyond the
world of our everyday senses,
that we have direct access to
a guidance and a wisdom that
is not part of this world.
We have access to an external
reality or an external guide.
So when we make
these comparisons,
except for the language, you
can see the similarities.
Is it possible that
thousands of years ago,
our ancestors were
trying to inform us,
in a language of their time,
something that they understood
that we are only
beginning to awaken
to the possibility of
happening in our lives,
that we are actually
in an artificial world,
a temporary world that has
a beginning and an end,
that we're learning
something here,
and that we have access to
an external guidance when
we need that access.
We can't tell the real
from the illusion.
And as a matter of fact,
the Sanskrit word maya,
the word itself maya,
actually means illusion.
This is a fundamental concept
in the Hindu tradition.
And what I love about the Hindu
tradition is that they tell us
that it is under the illusion,
under maya's influence,
that the soul identifies with
the body to the point where we
cannot tell ourselves as
separate from the illusion
of this physical world.
Under maya's
influence, we get lost
in the body's expressions
of ego and fear, sex, race,
the color of our
skin, our belief
systems under the
illusion of maya.
And where this
gets really, really
interesting is in
those same traditions,
the idea of enlightenment
means to escape the maya,
to escape the illusion.
So if you watch the
movie "The Matrix",
the 1999 blockbuster
hit "The Matrix",
as we escape the
illusion of maya,
this would be the equivalent
of taking the red pill,
so of awakening to a
greater reality that
exists beyond the senses
of our everyday lives
or everyday world.
Christian traditions tell us
something very, very similar.
They tell us almost universally
this world is temporary,
that it is an illusion,
not to get stuck here,
that we're here only briefly,
and that we are preparing.
They actually say we're
preparing ourselves
to live in another world.
In the Christian traditions
it's called heaven or hell.
We can place whatever meaning
we choose to place on that.
But the idea is that
where we end up going
depends on how well we learn
the rules and the principles
of this world that
we're living in now.
This parallels the ideas of
a simulation almost to the t.
So as we learn to embrace things
like compassion, forgiveness,
the honoring of life,
things like that,
that prepares us to live
successfully in whatever world,
whatever environment
it is that we're
moving to beyond this world.
So we could go on
in other traditions,
and maybe you've done
this in your own life.
You can see the parallels.
The key here is that
in both the Hindu
and the Christian
traditions, we have
access to this
wisdom that is beyond
our immediate environment,
an external wisdom.
And I find this
fascinating because when
I look into the
artwork, for example,
of some of our most ancient
traditions, and I ask myself
how would they have portrayed
this idea visually 2000,
2,500 years ago?
And knowing what we now know
about the possibility of us
living in a simulation,
when we look at the artwork
and we see the prophets
from this world climbing
a ladder into the
cloud and the heavens
to communicate with
something beyond this world,
we have to ask, is this
what they're telling us?
Is this what they
are portraying?
So when we see the
artwork that was
left to us by our ancestors
2,000, 2,500 years ago,
within the context of what we
now know about simulations,
we have to ask, is this
what they were portraying?
Is this what they were
trying to tell us?
Were they depicting
in their artwork.
this relationship
between us and this world
and the ability to
transcend this world,
to access a wisdom, an
external source of wisdom,
in another world?
When we see them climbing
the ladders into the heavens,
for example, how else would
they have portrayed something
like that?
So these are all
things to consider
when we're talking
about this relationship
between an ancient
description of us living
in a temporary,
illusionary world,
and what the best science
of the modern world
is now telling us about
simulations and the way
they work.
There's a school of thought in
some scientific circles that
consciousness itself is in
constant dialogue with itself,
that consciousness is
constantly communicating
with itself, that we are
with ourselves
through the things
that we create, through
our art, through our music,
through our movies, through
the books that we write.
And I personally
believe that there's
a lot of truth to
this line of thinking.
I believe that when we
create individually,
we are responding to an impulse,
a collective impulse that
comes to us from our
collective consciousness.
And if this is the case, it
suggests that we are constantly
informing ourselves of a reality
that we know, on some level,
is true.
And we are informing
ourselves so
that we can engage with that
reality on a conscious level.
Let me just give you an example.
Maybe you're a "Star Trek" fan.
I'm a huge "Star Trek" fan.
And in "Star Trek: The Next
Generation", the 13th episode
of the seventh season,
there is an amazing segment
that is titled "Homeward".
And it is a very,
very powerful story
that I believe illustrates
how powerful this idea
of a simulation really is.
Now if you're a
"Star Trek" fan, you
may know that aboard
the Starship Enterprise,
there's a special room
that is called a holodeck.
And in the holodeck, it
is possible to recreate
a simulation on the
ship of an environment
that the crew may
find themselves
in when they beam
down to another world
so that they can
master the parameters
and prepare themselves
for that environment.
That concept is going
to be very important
for this particular episode.
In this episode, the
Starship Enterprise
has gone to another
star system, and they've
found an Earth-like planet with
humans living on this planet.
However, the humans chose
a non-technological path
of progress.
They didn't become
a high tech society.
They became a very simple,
agricultural society.
They live close to the earth.
They raise their family,
they grow their food,
and they don't have disease.
They live to be
healthy old ages.
And it's a very
beautiful lifestyle.
But this is "Sar Trek", so
there has to be a catch.
And the catch is
that the solar system
is about to be destroyed.
The sun is going
to go supernova.
It's going to explode, and
this planet will be destroyed,
and all the lives will be lost.
The crew of the
Enterprise find themselves
in this very awkward
position because their job
is to observe and not to
interfere with any form of life
they find, on the one hand.
On the other hand, these
are humans on this planet,
and they don't want
to see them all die.
So they find a very interesting
and innovative solution.
What they do is this.
When the people on the
planet go to sleep at night,
they are beamed, in their
sleep, aboard the Starship
into a recreation of their
world in the holodeck
of the Starship, a simulation
on the Starship that they cannot
tell from the real world
that they're living in.
And the idea is that once
they're all there safely,
that the crew will take this
population to another planet
that looks just like their
own, beam them back down,
and they'll never
know what happened.
So they've met all the criteria
of the Starship mission.
They have saved the
life, yet they have not
interfered in the process.
Well, this wouldn't
be a "Sar Trek"
if something didn't go wrong.
And what goes wrong in
this particular episode
is that the power system on
the Enterprise breaks down,
and the simulation
begins to break down
that the people are
living in, and they
see their virtual world
begin to dissolve.
And the rest of the episode
is a very heartfelt episode
of humans communicating
with humans honestly
about what their intent was,
and where they come from,
and why they've done
what they've done.
The point of me
sharing this story
is that the people on the
surface of that planet, when
they found themselves
in the holodeck, they
could not tell the difference
between that holodeck
and the world that
they are living in.
And the question is,
is this our story?
Are we already there?
Is consciousness
informing us, reminding
us of the truth
of our existence,
through our artistic
creations, that we
are living in this simulation?
And if it is, what
is it saying to us?
What are we asking
ourselves to remember?
If consciousness is informing
itself through the art,
maybe the theme of the
art is reminding us
of the deepest truths
of our existence.
Look at the films that are
so popular right now things,
like "The Matrix" that I
just mentioned, or "Avatar".
Both of these hugely popular
films, they touch something
so deep within
individuals, something
that so many people said
was so familiar to them.
Some people actually
cried when they
were watching these films
because it touched an element
of truth within them.
In both of these films, there
are artificial environments,
simulations where humans are
projected into lifelike bodies
just like we have right
now so that they can
interact in these environments.
The question is, are
we already there?
If you were living in a
simulated environment,
would you even know it?
And how would you know it?
Can you tell a simulation
from a base environment?
I'm going to show you a couple
of images on your screen,
and I'm going to
ask you if you can
tell the difference
between these
and an artificial environment.
What you're looking at
now is a mountain range
covered with snow.
How real does this look to you?
Is this an artist's rendition?
Is it a digital reality?
I'm going to tell you right
now this is a simulated image.
It is a virtual image.
The same with this,
another mountain range.
It's doing exactly
the same thing.
Looks real.
It looks like a photograph.
You cannot tell it
from a photograph.
This is a digital reality.
Look how real this looks.
Look at the vegetation,
look at the sky,
look at the texture
of the rocks.
If you didn't know that
this was a digital reality,
you would not be able to tell
this from the real thing.
This is the African Savannah
is what you're seeing
on your screen right now.
Look at the trees.
Look at the leaves on the trees.
We cannot tell these
images from the real thing.
To us, these look real.
And that's the point where
we're going with this.
Scientists now are
beginning to take
the possibility of us living
in a simulation very seriously.
So seriously, in
fact, that they're
designing entire
scientific projects
to determine whether or not
this is, in fact, the case.
John Barrow is an Oxford
University physicist.
He's also a 2006
Templeton Award Laureate.
And I want you to listen to what
he said in a quote for a paper
that he was writing.
What he said is this.
He said, "It has
long been recognized
that technological
civilizations, only
a little more
advanced than ours,
will have the capacity
to simulate universes
in which self-conscious entities
can emerge and communicate
with one another."
Look at what John
Barrow has said.
What he's saying is
technological civilizations
will have this capability.
And the reason this
is important to us
is because the best
science of the modern world
is now changing the
way we have been
taught to think about
ourselves and our relationship
to the Earth.
When I was in school back
in the 1950s, 60s, and 70s,
I was taught that
civilization is linear,
that civilization
began about 5,000,
maybe 5,500 years ago, during
the time of ancient Sumeria,
it began relatively primitive,
and that civilization
accelerated in a linear
fashion from the less developed
to the more complex
so that we are
the pinnacle of sophistication.
We are the highest form of
technological advancement
that has ever graced
the face of the Earth.
This is what you and I have
been taught, on the one hand.
And on the other hand,
there's a growing body
of peer reviewed scientific
evidence that's telling us
this is not the case.
The evidence no longer
supports that story.
And when I say peer
reviewed, I want
to be very clear
what I mean by this
because I'm going to
reference peer reviewed work
through the rest of this series.
A peer reviewed
paper is a paper that
has been written by
a single scientist
or maybe a group of scientists.
And after it is written,
before it is published,
it is circulated among peers,
hence the term peer reviewed,
other scientists who
have the opportunity
to look at the paper,
look at the research,
try to find errors, try to find
where the evidence breaks down
or where it is
actually supported
with current research.
This is a process
that can take months.
It can take years.
Sometimes it'll take six
to eight years for a paper
to go through a
peer review process
before it is finally
accepted and published
in a peer reviewed scientific
journal such as "Nature",
for example.
"Nature" is a very
prestigious peer
reviewed scientific journal in
the contemporary world today,
and it is available
for the lay person
to catch up on all
of the new science.
So the point of me
making that description
is that peer reviewed
science is now
telling us that what we have
thought of our civilization
and of our history in the
past is no longer supported
by the evidence.
Now we know that
civilization is not linear.
We did not begin in a
single primitive state
and develop in a straight
line, in a linear fashion,
to the point we are today.
Rather, civilization is cyclic.
And the evidence is very
clear that this civilization,
as we know it, has occurred
within cycles that average
about 5,000 years apiece.
This is reflected
in the traditions
that we see in the
Mesoamerican calendars.
For example, the
ancient Maya had very,
very clear mathematical
representations of these
5,000-year cycles, how
they begin, how they end,
and what they mean to us today,
as have other civilizations.
So the reason I'm
sharing this with you
is that the idea that we
are the first technological
civilization, advanced
technological civilization,
is no longer supported
by the evidence.
I described some of
these civilizations
in the first season
of "Missing Links"
if you'd like to go back
and take a look at some
of those in more detail.
But what John
Barrow is saying is
it's long been recognized that
technological civilizations
only a little more
advanced than ours
will have this tremendous
computing capacity.
So when we now look
back into our past,
we have to ask the
question, is it possible,
is it possible that
there have been
highly advanced technological
civilizations in the past that
followed a path similar to
ours, and perhaps even advanced
beyond where we are today?
Is it possible that it
happened here on Earth?
Is it possible that it's
happened in other places?
And the reason this is
such a powerful question is
because, as I mentioned earlier,
when we look at the simulations
that we saw in the beginning of
this episode and how real they
are, and how difficult it is
to tell the simulation from
the real world-- when
you saw Michael Jackson,
if you did not know that he
had already died in 2009,
if you were in that audience
and you were seeing that,
and prior to that time
you'd been on a deserted,
remote desert island somewhere
and never got the message that
Michael Jackson had passed--
how would you have
known that that
was a digital representation?
You probably wouldn't have.
So the question that the
scientists now are asking--
as we embrace the deep
truth of cyclic civilization
and cyclic civilizations that
go back 15,000 or 20,000 years
or more before the present--
is it possible that those
civilizations developed in ways
that we simply
have not recognized
in the current world, that we're
only now beginning to entertain
the possibility of recognizing?
And this is one of those places
where the evidence is emerging,
but there is a reluctance--
and I have to be very honest
and say there's actually a
resistance, in some places,
to sharing the new discoveries.
There's a resistance in
mainstream classrooms,
in mainstream textbooks, to talk
about cyclic civilization going
back 15,000 years
before present.
We're certainly not seeing
in the documentaries
and the television specials,
with rare exceptions.
That's why it's important for
me to share this information
and talk to you about it here.
I'm a scientist.
I'm a degreed geologist.
And I think science is good.
Science serves us.
But science is designed
to be constantly updated
as new information emerges.
Science is not static.
And this is what's happened.
In many respects,
science has been
hijacked by other interests,
by corporations, by politics,
by religion.
So the science that
we've asked to serve us
can only serve us if
we keep it honest.
And what the science is
honestly saying to us
is that the world of the past is
very, very different from what
we've been led to believe.
There have been advanced
technological civilizations.
We knew they had electricity.
We've seen the buried cables.
We've seen the
pipes underground.
We've seen the civilizations
with hot and cold
running water, stained
glass windows, high art,
advanced mathematics,
knowledge of star systems
that we only had in
the 20th century.
And we're looking at
civilizations over 10,000 years
old that had this knowledge.
So I'm saying all of this now
to come back to the question,
is it possible that as
advanced civilization,
maybe ours, has developed
simulated realities a long time
ago for reasons that we'll
explore in this series?
And if so, is it possible
that we are living inside
of those realities?
So now that we've defined the
forbidden question of what
a simulated reality is and we've
explored why it's important,
let's take a look
at the evidence.
Let's see what it's telling us.
In the next episode,
we'll see the results
of the very first
scientific study design
to determine if we are, in
fact, living in a computer
simulation.
Or want to thank you
for joining me today.
And be sure to tune in
for our next all-new
episode of
"Simulation by Design:
Are We Living in a
Virtual Reality?"
[THEME MUSIC]